North Walas. South of here it should
ten stay dry
North Wales. South of here it should
ten stay dry with some bright spells
at times. The winds will be a
feature particularly south—east
Scotland and east of the Pennines,
gusts of up to 60 miles an hour.
gusts of up to 60 mils an hour.
Travel
gusts of up to 60 miles an hour.
Travel disruption. Temperature wise,
double figures for most, it will
feel quite mild for the time of
year. It might not feel like it
because of the strength of the wind
and the rain. It stays very west
across much of the north and west of
the UK through Friday night. We’ll
start to see some of the rain
pushing further south into England
and Wales affecting the south—west,
unwelcome rain here. Further north,
turning cooler with lots of showers,
snow on the hills and it will be
mailed to start Saturday across
England and Wales. Saturday is an
England and Walas. Saturday is an
blustery day,
England and Wales. Saturday is an
blustery day, sunshine and showers,
"TY
very windy in the north—west of
very windy in the north-west of
these
very windy in the north—west of
these showers will be wintry. On
Sunday we start right across the
South but conditions improve into
the afternoon with plenty of
sunshine around but with more rain
in the forecast of course and
because the ground is so saturated
ﬂooding
flooding could
Want to escape to new worlds
this weekend?
I don’t know and I don’t care.
We’ve got you sorted.
Right, let’s get to it.
You should leave now
while you still can.
I am very pleased.
The game is on!
Wow. "Yourfinal destination is..."
Oh, my God.
"Uh—shoo—err"?
Waite minute... Whatare...? What?
HE PUFFS
I have no idea.
Maybe flip the paper.
I can’t imagine
we’re going that far.
We’re in no—man’s—land.
There’s a guy
coming over with a gun.
Put the camera down.
WIND BLOWS
BRANCHES CREAK
LEAVES RUSTLE
BIRDS CHIRP
FLUTTERING WINGS
CROWS CAW
True Crime podcasts.
Listen now on the BBC Sounds app.
Tonight we are in Weymouth.
Welcome to Question Time.
On tonight’s panel, George Eustice,
appointed a week ago as Secretary
of State for the Environment,
Food and Rural Affairs and an old
hand at the department where he has
been a minister since 2013.
Alison McGovern,
a Labour MP since 2010.
She served under Gordon Brown
and Ed Miliband and chairs
the Labour group Progress,
originally founded
to support Tony Blair.
Chairman of The Royal Bank
of Scotland, former Deputy governor
of the Bank of England and the first
chair of the Financial Advisory
of the Financial Advisory Authority,
Howard Davies.
Ash Sarkar, journalist,
activist and contributing editor
of left—wing online publication
Novara Media.
And broadcaster, commentator,
former Conservative politician
and train geek, Michael Portillo.
Welcome to our panel,
to our audience here, and of course,
as always to you at home.
You canjoin in the conversation
on social media at...
Right, we are going to start tonight
not with one question, but with two.
Can we hear please hear
from Suzanna Bell and Lee Andrade.
Would you please explain to me,
a community nurse, how chronic
understaffing in social care will be
tackled given the government’s
new immigration system.
And, Lee?
Hoteliers struggle all year to staff
permanent positions.
Who will be recruited
into the seasonal positions that
are traditionally filled
by the EU citizens?
Obviously this is a response
from both of you to the immigration
proposals that we had this week.
Alison.
Well, I think the thing about these
migration proposals that
we’ve had from the Tories
demonstrate two things.
Firstly, that the Tories
define a person’s worth,
the value of their work,
by money, which I think
is interesting, given
how hard some people,
particularly in social care,
but in other aspects like retail
and hospitality work.
The other thing I find absolutely
mystifying about this is that
I thought that BorisJohnson
and his friends in the Cabinet
were free marketeers.
I thought they believed
in the free market.
But actually this immigration system
is going to be really bureaucratic.
So, I think that actually it’s
going to be much more complex
for people and I do think
that we are going to end up
in particular areas like those that
have been mentioned with significant
challenges and shortages.
But the one thing I hope that comes
out of it all is that for those
people who do work in social care
that we work out a way through this
to pay those people some more.
It is one of the hardestjobs
in this country and I am sick
to death of people who work
in social care being on poverty pay.
Do you support the labour position
that was voted at party conference
that there should be
freedom of movement?
I think freedom of movement
was a good thing.
I think that the single market works
because it gives everybody a chance
and an opportunity to learn around
the continent of Europe and to work.
0K, Michael Portillo.
Well, I think it’s extremely
important that we should not have
shortages in the health service,
in care homes and in hotels.
And I think the government
is going to have to show a certain
amount of flexibility.
There are some dangers I think
in the new immigration policy,
and that’s why they have said
they are going to have to adapt
to what actually happens.
I do think we have got ourselves
into a rather unhealthy
position nationally,
where we assume that care workers
and health workers are going to come
from other countries and probably
not stay very long and probably not
move up through the system and not
be promoted to senior positions.
And in hotels as well
and restaurants, only a very small
number of the people who go
in as waiters and so on,
as chambermaids, have
the opportunity to be promoted.
I think we ought to get back
to a situation where more British
people see the care industry,
the national health service,
catering, hotels, see these
as careers and go to them
because they want
to go to these jobs.
Have the proper qualifications, have
training and have the opportunity
to move up through the system.
I think there is something rather
decadent about the situation we have
got into where we think
there are lots ofjobs that only
foreigners and probably rather
transitory foreigners
at that will do.
I ratherjoin with Alison
in thinking that one
of the consequences of this may be
that we will have people
who are very committed, who have
decided it is what they want to do
for their lifetime,
and certainly, therefore,
are going to be better paid.
I think the consequences of this
immigration policy are pretty broad
and pretty positive.
You said you could see dangers.
What are they, briefly?
The danger is the short—term one
is that of course if the policy
bites and there are vacancies,
then the government will have
to respond quickly.
Lee, where are you?
What is your feeling on this?
You heard what Michael had to say.
I think the care industry
and hospitality industry
are very different anyway.
I absolutely agree that the care
industry should be paid a lot more.
I wonder about the hospitality
industry, though.
We are giving a double standard,
we are saying they should...
Michael is talking about maybe
rather than getting people
in from the rest of the world why
not get British people to do
this and train them up?
Is that realistic?
As far as you are concerned?
No, we are constantly
looking for staff all
the way through the year.
The bulk of our staff come
from the European Union mostly
for the seasonal work
because we cannot get
staff any other way.
Why do you think British people
aren’t going for it?
Well, firstly, they worry
about what they are going to do out
of season, so if they are only
employed for eight months
of the year what will they do
for the next four months
of the year?
That is obviously a concern.
You couldn’t employ them
all the year—round because you don’t
have the business for them
all the year round.
But I do worry about having a double
standard when you say
you want to see people come
into the hospitality industry and be
treated as professionals
and look to go forward,
but on the other hand you say this
is unskilled work,
it is cheap labour coming in to do
it, which doesn’t paint a picture
of professionalism or a job that
people might want to go into.
George, since these immigration
proposals were mooted
by the Home Secretary there has been
a fair degree of outcry
from a number of sectors,
not least the hospitality industry
and the social care sector.
How much of these proposals
are going to stay as is?
I think the important thing
to remember, as we leave
the European Union we have got
a chance to do things differently
and to have an independent
immigration policy.
And rather than simply having free
movement with European countries,
we have got the chance to say
we are going to have a skills —based
immigration system and not decide
on allowing people free movement
just because they are European,
but to actually have people
with the right skills
from around the world.
In terms of the sectors that
have been mentioned,
it’s important to recognise
that the EU citizens that
are here now working in those
industries can stay.
In fact, over 3 million...
You know that there is unemployment
in the social care sector,
there are jobs that can’t be filled
in the hospitality sector.
Yes, but we need to try to wean
ourselves off this constant
pipe dream of people coming
from other countries.
There are industries
that could automate more
to replace some of those jobs.
In social care?
Not the care sector, no, admittedly.
Do you think you are going to have
to realistically give some
flexibility when it comes
to social care?
The point I was making is we have
got over 3 million that have already
signed up to settle here,
so there is a lot of EU citizens
that are already here working
who will stay and can stay.
We have also alongside this opened
seasonal agricultural workers
scheme for 10,000 people,
and there are also special
provisions for the NHS.
There is an NHS visa scheme
and there is a way for people to get
points if they have less
than the threshold.
There are lots of hands up.
Let’s hear from the woman
here in the front in the pink.
Interesting what you
are saying here.
68 million people who now live
in England, going up, UN estimates.
At what stage the panel think people
in this country have had enough?
That we should close the borders,
completely close the borders
because it’s got to the stage now
there is no education, schooling,
infrastructure, it’s enough.
We are sinking.
Surely someone has got to see common
sense and say enough is enough?
You’ve got people flooding into this
country that cannot speak English.
I come from London, in the national
health service everything is written
in different languages.
How much is that costing?
How much is it costing
for the interpreters.
Sorry, madam, how much is it costing
for the interpreters?
I was in hospital last week,
the interpreter never turned up
for the peopla who couldn’t speak
English.
She was paid, they all had to go
on and all the radiologists stood
around doing nothing.
What sort of country
is allowing this? is allowing
this tourism to come in,
arrive on a plane, you get free
service, you can have your babies,
you can just carry
on having it all forfree.
Why haven’t they got points set up
in the hospitals and you pay it
like you do in every other country
you go to?
You wouldn’t turn up in America
and be allowed to go for free.
OK, let’s let the panel answered
some of those points.
OK, let’s let the panel answer
Strongly made.
One thing is I wouldn’t presume
to know what kind of nonsense
I get up to in America,
but that’s another story.
On this matter of health tourism
what has been found is that migrants
to this country bringing more
and contribute more in tax
to this country bring more
than they take out of the system.
It’s rubbish.
No, it’s true.
It’s a fact, sorry I don’t care
what you think, it’s a fact.
Migrants, particularly
when they are young,
they are working age,
they are contributing to the private
sector in the form of paying rent,
through paying for their cost
of living in this country,
and also contributing in this
country through taxes.
When it comes to Britain,
we have an ageing population,
so you have got more and more people
who will age out of the workforce
and at the moment with our birth
rate we don’t have enough people
ageing into the workforce to be able
to support the kind of social care
and pensions needs which are only
going to grow.
But one thing that I really
want to say because this is really
important to me is I don’t
want to make the case for migration
on GDP and the labourforce,
I want to make the human
case for it.
My grandmother came to this country,
she was 17, and it was to fill a gap
in the labour market
which still exists,
which is in social care.
Under these rules she wouldn’t have
been able to come to this country,
she wouldn’t have been able
to meet my grandfather,
fall in love, have children,
have some grandchildren.
I know many of you will not
agree that all of her
grandchildren are a good idea,
but, we exist.
That is a human story,
that has got worth and it has got
a value which cannot be measured
purely in GDP.
I understand that, but why
would you prefer European countries
over other countries in the world.
I think this is the point,
you should have a system
that is around the people that
you need, the skills
shortages you have, not
about the fact that they are from
European countries.
Here are two things I think
are good about this policy,
and you’ll never hear me praising
the Conservative government.
Getting rid of the £30,000
threshold, which was
completely bonkers
and an arbitrary cap.
However, I don’t believe that
by making conditions worse for EU
nationals we are actually making
them betterfor non—EU nationals.
I’d like to get round a little bit
more of the audience.
Yes, the women in the
black and white top.
Hello, yes, getting back
to your previous comment about why
do these people not stay
in theirjobs?
I think it boils down to the fact
that we don’t value enough
of our own people and pay them
enough and value them
much more strongly.
Why should we deem a foreigner could
do a job because they are paid less?
It is absolutely outrageous.
We need to address the social care
crisis anyway and I think we must
start with valuing them more
and pay them well.
The man in the orange top.
Any illusion that BorisJohnson
might have been a bit neutered
after his election win has kind
of gone out the window.
It’s nationalism to me.
It’s picking someone over,
I don’t know, the bit
of land they were born on.
If they’ve got the skills,
they should be given
the chance to move on up.
It seems a bit worrying,
it is not the Brexit
dream of 350 million,
Utopia.
It’s kind of the first realistic,
grim step and it will be a bit
of a scary wake up call and people
might have a few regrets.
OK, the woman in the glasses there.
How are care homes going to be able
to manage to pay care workers higher
wages when they are short of money?
Lots of care homes
are closing anyhow.
Surely that’s going to be a huge
problem in the future?
Can we hear from you on this,
you are particularly concerned.
You work in the social care sector.
Yes, I do, I’m a community nurse,
I work in community nursing,
caring for these people that
require social care.
12% of the health and social care
workforce are foreign nationals.
We couldn’t function without them
and so discouraging them from coming
to work in social care
is going to cause the social care
system to collapse even further
than it already has and is a scary
thought that people like myself
are going to be picking up
the mess of these people
who are going to become ill and not
have the care that they need.
I’m going to come
to you in a minute.
George, I want to put
that point to you.
I thought you had
forgotten I was here.
No, I hadn’t forgotten.
Provision was made to allow in care
workers in the previous immigration
bill which was just over a year ago.
That has been dropped now.
Did it matter then but it hasn’t
it doesn’t matter now?
I think the point is that the 3
million or so here are staying
and they can stay in those roles.
As Michael said earlier
we have to basically start
training our own workforce in these
areas and value some of these
careers and these jobs more.
I think we can do that.
We need to start training
and having our own home—grown
talent in these areas.
We have nearly full employment.
Are you confident, and you know
about business, are you confident
we will find these people?
Not in the particular
areas that were created.
We do have almost full employment,
but speaking from the perspective
of an employer, obviously employers
have been in dialogue
with the government
about what its immigration policy
should be, hearing in mind
the needs of the economy.
And I think what they’ve come up
with is in some ways not bad.
I agree with Ash about
the reduction in salary.
But there are two areas,
and you hit on them precisely,
the double question,
where I think they’ve got it wrong.
One is social care and
the other is hospitality.
But I think the solutions are very
different in each case.
I think in the case of hospitality,
what we need is something
like what George referred
to about migrant workers etc
in agriculture, and I think
we probably need something
equivalent in hospitality
because I do know that particularly
in relatively well off areas
where it is expensive to live,
it’s actually very difficult
to recruit local workers for hotels
and restaurants and stuff.
In social care, I think it’s
a completely different question.
And there, I think, we are awaiting,
and have been for some time,
a government policy on social care.
Of course, there was an attempt
at it in the famous Theresa May
manifesto that crashed and burned,
if you recall.
And the Prime Minister said
there was a plan ready to go
when he stood on the steps
of Downing Street.
Exactly, and that’s what we need.
Because the problem
is the social care
sector is underfunded
and as a result there are all sorts
of false incentives,
the NHS has an incentive to dump
people out of the NHS into social
care, but social care has got
an incentive to dump
people back into the NHS,
particularly older people.
And this has got to be sorted out,
and that, I don’t think,
is primarily an immigration
question at origin.
It’s about how we fund social care.
So these are the two gaps
in the policy, but they do need
different solutions.
The man there with the glasses.
One of the pitfalls,
or potential pitfalls of the points
system that has been proposed,
I think is, with regards
to the minimum wages scale,
which has been pitched
at about £25,000.
It’s going to backfire
and cause further problems,
at least in the health care system,
because the current salary
of the health care people
is about 16, £17,000.
And they do not reach that
threshold of £25,000.
They miss out on 20
points straightaway
which will backfire,
I think.
The man at the back.
People coming over into the country
looking forjobs in the social care
industry, like the NHS
and the welfare state,
how can they be ensured theirjob
will pay them well enough?
Because economic conditions
like austerity have resulted
in people in the NHS leaving,
going on strike, not providing care
for people who need it.
OK, the woman there with her hand
up in the black top.
How do you think people feel
about being labelled
a low skilled worker?
APPLAUSE.
I think it’s divisive.
Care is not low skilled.
Care is highly skilled,
highly skilled.
It’s not paid enough,
but is a highly skilled job.
I would love the government,
as part of this, to bring forward
a proper care workforce plan
so we can see whether...
Of course we want British people
to work in the care sector,
but we want it to be a really good
job where people can progress
on and be paid enough to feel
the dignity and self—respect
for doing what is a really
highly skilled job.
APPLAUSE.
Michael?
I mean, maybe in a way to summarise,
I don’t think we should be proud
as a country of having run
an immigration policy that meant
that lots of our vital services have
depended on cheap labour coming
from outside, which has not only
meant we are dependent on that,
but it’s also driven down the wages
of people in this country.
And this has been happening for...
What is the evidence for that?
Well, it’s obvious, if you admit
a source of people that are willing
to come and do jobs that British
people are not willing to do
at that level of pay,
then all pay is going to be dragged
down by it.
What the data shows is that
where there has been a small
amount of undercutting,
it is highly localised in particular
sectors and particular regions.
It’s not across the entire
workforce at all.
I think we are moving...
ALISON: I think Ash and Howard need
to give you an economics seminar!
I think we are moving to a position
where we will feel greater national
dignity because we are not doing
that, we will be inviting British
people to be qualified and stay
in jobs and have a vocation and get
away from this rather
decadent position.
I want to take a question
from Jane Edsell.
whereabouts are you 7
That addresses this
exact point, I think.
As an economically inactive person,
what will entice me to fill
the gap left by the exodus
of "low—skilled foreigners"?
Because you are in the 8.16
million, I think it was.
Yeah, 8.4 million.
Cited by the Home Secretary
as the workforce we could draw upon.
Many of those are students.
Retired.
Currently sick.
Carers.
You would count.
So what would entice you,
as Michael says, rather
than delegate this work to people
from outside our shores?
I think it’s tricky
for me currently.
I’m retired, I retired early,
but I’m also on the edges of looking
at caring for elderly parents.
So there’s the potential I will be
stepping into that arena.
So could you be enticed and be
part of this workforce
Michael is calling for?
Probably not at the
moment, I would say.
Being on the edges of, as I say,
being wanting to care
for elderly parents,
or being part of that plan,
that to me is more important
than going out and working
and filling some of those gaps.
Maybe others may be enticed
to do that, but for me,
it’s not something Ifeel
able to do.
Does it concern you?
When Priti Patel talks about this
8.5 million, and then...
It has attracted a fair degree
of criticism, it’s fair to say,
the majority of those people are not
actually available to work.
So what was she thinking?
I think the point she was making
was that there are people who can be
drawn from that group.
Not that all 8 million of that group
could or even would.
But there will be some students,
there will be some older people,
for instance who might go
into a caring role and that might
work for them, working part—time.
But the point she was making was,
that’s a group that can be drawn on.
But to touch on a point a gentleman
made earlier about the NHS
staff and the threshold,
because the threshold actually
with NHS staff doesn’t apply
in quite the same way.
So to get the points
there are certain jobs such
as nursing where you can actually
come in on a salary
significa ntly below that.
If you are in one of those
occupations where you are at
a shortage, including the NHS,
and of course we also have the NHS
visa system as well.
Howard, very briefly.
We are obviously not
going to attract you,
the woman in blue, into work,
into a position where we are going
to force people to work
if they don’t want to.
But the general answer
to your question is,
we have to have more flexible
working so people can fit it
in around caring responsibilities
and we have to have more lifetime
retraining opportunities
so people can retrain.
So the Labour manifesto
is what you just said.
That’s fine.
1983, I think!
Let’s move on, because there
are a lot of you that want to talk
about this next subject.
Before I do, I will tell
you that we will be
in Middlesbrough next week.
And after that we will be
in Tunbridge Wells with Labour
leadership hopeful Lisa Nandy.
If you’d like to be in the audience
you can call this number or go
to the website and follow
the instructions there.
So do come and join us
at either of those locations.
It would be great to see you.
Let’s take the next question
from Hilary Maxwell.
Have we forgotten how to be kind?
Hilary, you are referring,
of course, to the tragic
death of Caroline Flack.
Absolutely.
She in fact said on one
of her Instagram posts back
in December, I think it was,
she wrote, in a world where you can
be anything, be kind.
Ash?
When I first heard the news
about Caroline Flack,
like lots of people I was completely
shocked and saddened.
And after I was shocked
and saddened Ifelt,
in a way quite deeply angry,
because I thought that
after Amy Winehouse,
I thought that after Princess Diana,
this tabloid hunger to build up
young women in the public eye
just to tear them down,
that we would have learned
something from that.
And I know that...
Is itjust the press, do you think?
No, all of us in some
way participate in this
particularform of,
you know, media ecology.
All of us do.
We use social media,
we drive the clicks.
But ultimately I do think
that responsibility has
to lie with the press.
For instance, when it comes
to tobacco regulation,
you don’tjust expect smokers
to change their behaviour.
You expect tobacco companies
to be properly regulated.
They are the ones feeding this quite
unhealthy addiction.
I think there’s a parallel
there with the press.
Serving the public interest is not
the same thing as, you know,
meeting this quite ghoulish thirst
for details of people’s
lives that perhaps
sometimes we should just not have.
I think there needs to be a better
regulation of the press.
I think we might even need Levenson
II, so we can stop having a media
that instead of holding the powerful
to account is simply ruining
people’s lives for profit.
APPLAUSE.
Michael, you have been in public
life for quite some time.
You’ve had yourfair
share of press coverage,
some positive and some negative.
What’s your view?
I think my first reflection is that
I remember a friend of mine
committing suicide when I was very
young, and when that happens,
and you are close to the person,
you are left with a question
for the rest of your life as to,
was there anything you could have
done, should you have spotted
something, should
you have intervened 7
And so my sympathy is not only
with Caroline Flack,
but with all those people who may
find themselves in that position
at the moment and wondering
if there was anything
they could have done.
I don’t think I do rush to blame
someone in this situation,
in the way that I’ve
just heard from Ash.
There is an article I think
in today’s Telegraph about a woman
who found herself in the same
position, that she had been
accused of common assault
against her partner,
and she was talking
about her suicidal feelings
before it reached trial.
And when it did reach
the moment before trial,
it was suddenly called off.
And this woman was reflecting
that she might have taken her own
life and then she found she didn’t
even have to face the trial.
And that is a tragic thought here,
that Caroline Flack was clearly
overwhelmed by this feeling
about what the trial would be
and what it would mean.
And she can’t even have known,
what were the prospects that it
would even reach court,
let alone that it would
result in an outcome.
I don’t think I do blame
the Crown Prosecution Service,
because I know they would have been
blamed if these steps had not been
taken because she was a celebrity.
It is standard procedure that they
proceed even if the alleged victim
doesn’t wish to participate,
because that is very often because
the victim feels intimidated.
It is standard procedure,
although I think it is rather
a cruel one, and I’m not sure it
should be for partners in that
situation, not to be
allowed to communicate.
And Caroline Flack,
unlike some of the contestants,
of course, was a professional.
She has been in the public eye
for decades and knows
what it is to be...
She knew what it was to
be in the public eye.
And there is a thing that
happens with famous people,
which is we all love good publicity
and we all hate bad publicity.
And it is part of what goes
with the territory.
So I’m not rushing
to blame anyone here.
There are quite a few hands up.
The man in the blue shirt.
Hello, I have a unique
perspective on this.
I have been a television producer
for the last A0 years.
And also, today is the ninth
anniversary of my son’s suicide.
He was 2A years old when
he took his own life.
But I know that the press
and the media can be really
brutal in its ambition.
I know that, I’ve been there.
And unfortunately I’ve
been part of that,
and I hold my hand up to that.
But also, it can drag
in the vulnerable and spit them out.
It can be very, very brutal.
And that’s what I would like to say.
In terms of my son’s death,
there are many complications
to do with suicide.
There are many different reasons.
In my son’s case, he had taken
a prescription drug, Proacne,
and he’d become very,
very depressed, psychotic.
He suffered sexual dysfunction.
Eventually he committed suicide.
I am desperately sorry
for your situation, and I applaud
you for coming along tonight on this
anniversary and talking about it.
The one thing I’m hearing
about the many things you are seeing
is how complicated it is.
Alison, I’m thinking,
and I’ve been following the story
like everyone else.
I didn’t know Caroline Flack.
The press have come in for an awful
lot of criticism, perhaps rightly,
but these things can be
complex, can’t they?
They can.
Firstly, I would absolutely
agree with you, sir,
I think you’re really brave.
Hats off to you and I applaud
you for being frank
in the way you have.
I also think of Caroline Flack’s
family and what they must be
going through, and having to deal
with this constant attention must be
very, very difficult.
But I want to go back
to the question, which is,
have we forgotten how to be kind.
My answer to that is, yes and no.
My experience of life
is that there is a huge amount
of kind people in this country
doing their best.
And there are lots of ways,
as we have heard described,
where we are not kind.
And there are two answers to that.
The first is that we can all be
responsible for our own choices
and we can all choose to be kind
to one another, which is
what we frankly ought to do.
And the second thing is, we need
to make the system more kind.
So we so we know we need radical
investment in the mental health
system in this country.
But that goes through
every single aspect,
whether that’s workplace culture,
to make that more kind,
or whether that’s the way
the NHS can or can’t react
to particular conditions.
Let’s make that more kind.
Let’s make the Department
for Work and Pensions,
in the way that Universal Credit
functions, more kind.
I think there’s lots we can do.
But if the question is,
should we have a manifesto
for kindness, I say yes please.
The man here in the front.
I agree with this thing
about being kind and my condolences
to the gentleman over there.
The fact is Caroline Flack
was a very, very sad case
and the fact that she has
taken her own life is appalling.
But we have hundreds
and hundreds of veterans
who are dying at their own hands
every single year.
Where is the outcry?
Where is the support?
The women at the back
with the white T—shirt.
Kindness comes from all of us.
Are we not all guilty of not picking
up that phone and talking to someone
and just merely sending a text?
It means far more if you hear
kindness rather thanjust read it.
The woman there in the glasses.
Me?
Yes.
Well, I’d be the last
person to say the press
is exonerated of anything,
but on the other hand if you don’t
buy those newspapers,
and if you don’t read those
newspapers, they’re not
going to make the stories.
I think it’s up to us to pass
by those tabloids and not pay
attention to the stories that
are in the tabloids.
We sell those newspapers.
And of course much as the press may
or may not have a role to play,
there is the role of social media
as well, which you
touched upon, George.
Yes, and I do think coming
back to the original
question from Hilary,
that there is something about social
media, in particular Twitter,
that there is anonymity.
For some reason that has developed
a culture for people to think
it is OK to be rude and to be
abusive and aggressive.
I think we somehow need
to try to break that cycle
because this is a very,
very tragic, terrible case.
I agree with Michael that it’s wrong
to point the finger at any one
institution or organisation
because these are always
very complicated cases,
but we have issues in our schools
across the country at the moment
with teenagers suffering from mental
health and depression.
A lot of that is because they are
wearing their hearts
on their sleeve, seeking validation
from sometimes strangers and not
always getting it and getting abuse
and everybody is quite exposed.
I think there is this point
about trying to get some
courtesy and kindness back
into our discourse.
There is something about
social media that means
it is absent quite often.
I think George is right
about social media.
I lead a relatively sheltered
life in this respect.
I’m on Twitter and this and that
and I’m nota big Instagram person,
but I’m often amazed
by the virulence and hostility
and anger that people will come out
with once they hide behind
Cornish George, or whatever
handle they use.
Is that your handle, George?
Have you just been outed by Howard?
I’m famously not on Twitter.
I decided early on it is not for me.
It doesn’t appeal to me.
Let’s hear what Howard has to say.
I mean, it’s out of this very sad
set of circumstances which I think
show how tension can build up
in an individual and suddenly they
can go from being in everybody’s eye
to being very isolated.
Also what worries me,
and Michael may be right about not
criticising the CPS,
but what has happened
to innocent until proved guilty?
Are you saying they shouldn’t have
brought the prosecution?
No, I’m not saying that,
but I am saying that when this
prosecution was brought
she was dropped from herjob,
she wasn’t allowed to see
her other half, etc.
That wasn’t the CPS.
No, it wasn’t the CPS,
but suddenly you are isolated
because the assumption is made that
you must have done something wrong
and I think we’ve lost that innocent
until proved guilty dimension
which I think is most unfortunate.
But if we do get a debate
about civility, even if we can’t
get as far as kindness,
we could get back
to civility I think.
And if that comes out of this,
there will be something
positive from what is
a very unhappy situation.
Let’s see if we can do that at least
for the rest of the programme.
It has been pretty civil so far.
Let’s take a question
now from Carol Burgess.
Why has BorisJohnson not
reacted to the appalling
recent floods and had no
Cobra meeting?
APPLAUSE.
George, what is going on?
We’ve had Storm Ciara,
we’ve had Storm Dennis,
record heights in rivers such
as the River Wye, and we haven’t
heard a peep out of Borisjohnson.
Why no Cobra meeting?
Well, I have...
I know you have been very busy.
What about him?
When I was appointed last Thursday,
the first thing the Prime Minister
said to me is, we’ve got
Storm Dennis coming up.
We want you to lead
on that response.
We discussed the possible
impacts of Storm Dennis.
We immediately stood up what we had,
which is a flood response centre.
That’s an equivalent really to Cobra
that is focused on floods.
Hang on, you’ve got a Tory,
your own MP, saying
he was trying for nine days
to get emergency funding.
You have Tory MPs calling
for a Cobra meeting because it gets
all the departments together to make
a decision together about where
the funding is going to go
and where the resources
are going to go.
That’s the point of it.
There was one...
When the general election was going
on, there was a Cobra meeting then.
Why has there not
been one this week?
Because we have the flood response
centre and we also have local
resilience forums that lead
on the ground.
Have you had those then as well?
Yes...
So what is different this time
because it is worse this time?
The difference this time is we have
had two consecutive storms in a row.
But we were well prepared for them.
During the election, paradoxically,
because we were in what’s called
the purdah period and ministers
weren’t in their departments,
there was a slow start
to the response, and that’s why
the Prime Minister convened Cobra
to get it back on track.
That’s not happened this time.
In fact, we’ve had 1000 Environment
Agency staff on the ground.
We have laid 5000 metres
of temporary flood defences.
We’ve had 90 pumps moving.
We have protected around
25,000 properties over
the course of the last week.
And on Tuesday we did stand up
a comprehensive package of emergency
support with funding for councils,
hardship funds for homes
that have been flooded,
suspension of council tax for people
who have been affected,
business rates relief,
and other things besides.
Howard, in terms of the question,
the fact we haven’t heard
anything from Boris Johnson.
Is he unusually silent?
We haven’t heard anything.
Whether it would be useful
to have Boris galumphing
around in his wellies,
I’m not sure!
But Carol is not saying galumphing
around in his wellies,
you are saying you haven’t heard
anything from him?
No.
I think what George said
is probably fair in terms
of what the government
have been doing.
But I think the reality is that this
is all too late and after the event.
I think what we have to realise now
in this country is that these
incidence of extreme weather
conditions, and particularly floods,
are what we are going
to have to get used to.
What we are going to have to have,
as part of the Green new Deal,
or whatever we want to call it,
we are going to have to have a major
programme of investment
in protecting ourselves
against the implications of climate
change and rising sea levels.
Sea levels are rising three
millimetres a year and over time
that has an enormous effect.
I was talking to a Dutch economist
earlier this week and I said, "Well,
surely the Dutch must be worried
about all of this,
given what we have got?"
And she pointed out that actually
in the 19505 the Dutch had
a terrible series of floods and went
in for a major investment programme
to protect the Netherlands,
since when they have not had floods,
or they are very tiny
and they are very well protected.
And I think this is now at the point
where we just have to say this needs
a major programme of investment
to cope with rising sea levels
and if we don’t do that,
then we are left with George’s
emergency measures and sandbags and
I don’t think that will be enough.
We are doing that as well.
In the last five years we have spent
£2.5 billion on 600 projects
protected over 200,000 homes.
We are going to spend another
£4 million over the next five
years on flood defences.
Had we not done the work we have
done in the last five years,
there would have been another 25,000
homes affected by this
most recent event.
So, it will be 9% of H52.
Good, well done.
He is an economist after all.
I’m sure his maths is right.
But he is right, these extreme
weather events are becoming
more frequent, sadly.
We do need to invest
in flood infrastructure.
That is notjust hard defences
in towns, it can also be using flood
plains and soft dams and such
upstream
to try to slow the water flow
and that is something we are looking
at very closely.
If the government is taking it
so seriously, how come BorisJohnson
hasn’t responded to the climate
emergency that was set by Parliament
and the deadline to respond
to Parliament within that timeframe?
How come Claire O’Neill,
who was heading up the COP
conference said, you know what,
he just doesn’t understand climate
change and he told me directly
that he doesn’t understand myjob.
To me as an outsider that doesn’t
fill me with confidence
that our Prime Minister is taking
seriously the single most
important political issue
facing our country today.
He is taking it seriously
and you will see in the weeks
and months ahead with a policy
that we have got, with
the environmental that puts climate
change at the heart of it.
Climate change is a big feature
of our future agriculture policy.
Later this year, Glasgow
is hosting a COP and we have
got lots of proposals.
But Claire O’Neill
has left her post.
She is the one who said that
BorisJohnson, lam paraphrasing,
she didn’t actually say this,
she said he doesn’t give a stuff
about climate change.
He didn’t say exactly that.
I’m paraphrasing.
He was the one talking.
I think she said that after she was
replaced by somebody else.
Why, you are laughing at this
particular exchange.
Yes, basically because the COP
situation, the big, global summit
that we are supposed to be hosting,
is it in Glasgow or is it in London?
Who is the president of it?
We don’t really know.
It’s a bit chaotic and it says
a huge amount about our
Prime Minister that the collective
decision of the government
is that he is more holed up
in a country house somewhere
than he is actually getting out
there and offering a bit
of support to people
who are experiencing flooding.
I think the spirit of
the question is shouldn’t we be
seeing a bit more of him?
Don’t people want a bit more
reassurance that he has actually
got his finger on the pulse.
I’ll come to you in a minute, the
women in the front in the classes.
The reason I am asking is why has
the EU stopped dredging the rivers
and then they wouldn’t have flooded
in the first place.
Why the EU did?
Yes, why have they stopped dredging
all the rivers across the country
and then we wouldn’t
have this problem.
Over here.
I don’t know if any of the panel
walked through Weymouth today.
Yes.
Idid.
Did you see all the empty shops?
Shouldn’t the government cut
business rates for starters?
That would help the shops.
You are talking about
business rates for those
who have just been flooded.
Secondly, what the gentleman
there said about HSZ.
If you got the Chinese to do HSZ,
you’d have loads of loose change
to do all the flooding relief.
Michael.
I sense the mood of the country
is that in all sorts of ways
we want enormous change,
we just don’t want things to be
done the way they have
been done in the past.
With the floods it really
is like Groundhog Day.
Twice a year this happens,
there are more floods,
a minister comes on and says how
much we have spent.
People locally say it has all been
ineffective and then we have a row
about dredging the rivers and so on.
It looks to me as though
the Environment Agency has lost
all public confidence.
I think we really are at a stage
when we want something
bigger and different.
We want something quite exceptional,
a strategic look at how
we are going to deal with this.
It can’t surelyjust be
about building defences so we move
the water further down river
and a different lot
of people get flooded.
Surely what we need to do is think
about how we can get the water
from where it is falling to the only
plate which is safe,
which is the ocean.
That is the only place where it
doesn’t affect other people.
I just don’t get any
of that strategic feeling.
I think the comparison with HS2
is apposite in this respect.
I’m in favour of H52,
but I do think we need megaprojects
to move the water to places
where it is safe, rather than just
this defeated repeated effort
of building a few flood defences
here and there.
The question is about BorisJohnson
who seems to be very good at coming
to the House of Commons and making
very enthusiastic speeches
about trains, or doing things,
or having energy, but when it
actually comes to getting
projects delivered he seems
to be pretty poor.
What did he fail to do in London?
The garden bridge.
Water cannon.
He was going to have
an airport on an island.
We’ve had all of these great plans.
Had he done a photocell this week,
you too would have been
the leading critics.
One of the most surprising thing
is I have ever heard is that
Michael Portillo is in favour
of investment in railways.
That is pretty astonishing.
There is a point here,
you have a cabinet for a reason,
it is not a one—man show
and there are issues like this.
The Prime Minister spoke
to me last Thursday,
two days before the impact
of the floods came
through we discussed
what was coming up and we discussed
what the plan would be and we stood
up all of our emergency procedures
and we had a thousand EA staff
working out on the ground hard,
knocking on doors, warning people
and helping to support communities.
There is another point
to what Michael said as well,
the lack of strategic thinking,
you have been in this department
since 2013 and have been talking
about the floods since just
after you started.
Do you think why are
we still in the situation
that we have been in for years?
Know, because I can remember
when I worked for David Cameron many
years ago now in 2007
and there was a flood then
and there were 17,000 homes flooded.
This time we have had
a worse weather event,
the land is already waterlogged,
two consecutive storms,
and is terrible, we have
had M00 homes flooded,
but were it not for the defences
we build over the last decade,
that number would have been more
like 25,000 homes.
What we are doing is working,
but there is always more that we can
do and that is where we need
to continue investing in the future.
I’m trying to get as many
questions in tonight.
Let’s take a question now
from Maggie Stansfield.
Should we continue to support
the BBC as a universal public
service broadcaster?
AUDIENCE SUCKS AIR THROUGH TEETH.
SOME "OOHS".
I’m not sure what that
means, that sort of sigh,
the noise in the room!
Howard, I wanted to come to first
on this because you were part
of the Charter review for the BBC,
the review that happens
to find out how much money
the BBC should be given,
if at all.
And you are part of the review
in 2004—05, and it looked
at the licence fee.
Yes indeed.
The short answer to your question,
I would say, yes, personally.
We looked at this 15
years ago and concluded,
the licence fee is a funny thing
in a way because it has several
things up against it.
One is, of course, it’s a poll tax.
So the rich pay the same as the not
so rich, and that’s not normally
the good way of taxing,
really, because you like to have
taxes that are progressive.
So it’s not good from
that point of view.
And the only thing it had
going for it at the time...
Well, two things really.
One, people actually wanted it.
There was a majority
in favour of funding
the BBC with a licence fee.
So as economists, we would be
set there saying, well,
why should we sit there and tell
people they can’t have
what it is clear they actually want,
even if it is a slightly odd way
of doing it.
And what’s changed now is that it’s
clear that only about a quarter
of the population on recent opinion
polls do favour the licence fee.
So that has been a change over
the 15 years since I last
looked at it closely.
So I think the question
now has to be asked,
and the problem is that
while the BBC appears on free view,
while the BBC appears on Freeview,
it is not possible to determine
who is watching the BBC at any one
time, and determine whether you can
have a subscription service or not.
Because you are getting
it through Freeview.
I think in the long run,
in ten or 15 years time,
probably the BBC will have to move
to some kind of a different funding
model, a subscription model,
when the technology is available
to know exactly who is watching
what, and then you can charge them
appropriately for it.
In the meantime, I have to say,
I would stick with the licence fee.
Alison?
I reserve the right to criticise
the BBC when it does things that
I don’t like and puts
on programmes I don’t like...
Feel free, don’t mind me!
But I think we all have
to be a bit careful here,
because I think there’s a tonne
of things that the BBC does
that I can’t see really
a subscription service doing.
I can’t see anyone else doing.
Most primary schools in the country
watch Newsround now,
which is absolutely brilliant.
I can’t see anybody making
that for them for free.
There’s loads of programming
that we all know of that’s
absolutely brilliant that the BBC
does, so I think we
have to be careful.
Nobody should give the BBC
3 sort of free pass,
and we should engage
in our national support...
Nationalsport, rather,
of complaining about the telly,
and even shouting at it.
I’m sure people do that
at this programme.
I know they do.
I’m sure they do, but I would say,
let’s all be a bit careful,
because the BBC is an incredible
national institution,
like the National Health Service.
APPLAUSE.
Pretty unique to this country,
and I can’t see a paid
for subscription service doing some
of the things that the BBC does.
Michael, as a former
Conservative Cabinet minister,
Secretary of State, what do you make
of these briefings that seem to be
coming out of Number 10?
In the papers at the weekend?
Do you mind if I answer
the question, the main question?
Well, you can do that
one as well after.
Yes, if you like.
Although that’s not
an area of my expertise.
But I have to begin
by declaring an interest,
because I derive most of my income
from the licence payer.
LAUGHTER.
Bite the hand, Michael!
And therefore, you might be
surprised when I say that I do not
believe the licence fee can survive.
It’s partly, actually,
my experience of making films.
I make films with very young people.
And the young people
with whom I make films do not
pay the licence fee.
They do not have televisions.
They consume their media
on their mobile phones
or on their laptops.
And since, I think it was about two
years ago, when you went
on your laptop to download,
to go to iPlayer and catch up,
it asks you whether you
have a licence fee.
You now have to answer that
question, so they answer no and that
blocks them out of the BBC.
Therefore these young people now
have no connection with the BBC.
They don’t even watch the programmes
they make with me because they have
no access to the BBC.
And the BBC is losing its audience.
And why?
Because these people have any other
number of opportunities
to watch television,
and they consume it as they wish
and when they wish.
The other extraordinary thing
is that when you are abroad,
you cannot consume the BBC.
Or not BBC television, anyway.
So even though I pay the licence
fee, when I go abroad I am blocked
from watching the BBC.
And don’t forget the licence fee
is notjust for television.
It’s all the radio stations
and online as well.
Yes, radio is a different question
and a much simpler question.
But I also think that if we talk
about television for the moment,
there’s not much evidence now
on the BBC that it is performing
a public service role.
I don’t think there is much evidence
on the BBC now that they are doing
much that other people
couldn’t possibly do.
For example, in arts,
there are almost no arts programming
now on BBC television.
You won’t see arts,
you would watch Sky Arts.
Wouldn’t you watch BBC Four?
But coming to the more important
point, not only can British people
not watch the BBC abroad
when they have paid
their licence fee.
Foreigners can’t consume
the BBC directly either.
And there are eight,
9 billion people out there,
who would be very keen
to consume the BBC.
I don’t want to keep butting in,
but there is BBC World.
In the interests of accuracy.
BBC World is not a real channel.
The BBC is not proud
of BBC World, seriously.
I think the people who work
on BBC World are probably
proud of BBC World.
I’m not sure that they are.
LAUGHTER.
But the point is, 20 years ago,
Netﬂix was a corner shop
renting video tapes.
Today it is spending $10 billion
per year on content.
20 years ago, the BBC...
And it is billions in debt.
20 years ago the BBC
was a global name.
Today the BBC is wedded
to the licence fee.
It is like a polar bear
on a receding piece of ice.
APPLAUSE.
I have to get the rest
of the panel in.
Ash?
I’ve got really strong
feelings about this.
I think the BBC needs to adapt
or die, but it shouldn’t adapt
in the direction that
Dominic Cummings and his team
at Number 10 are angling for it
to change, which is to privatise,
commercialise and no longer be
licence funded model.
I think the way it needs to adapt
is to first be established
on a permanent statutory footing.
So you don’t have this brouhaha
every ten years over
the Charter renewal,
in which the government of the day
is able to exert a tremendous amount
of political pressure
by essentially holding the BBC’s
continuing existence hostage.
I also think we need to look
at things like a digital licence
fee, and also taxing some of these
big digital multinationals
like Netﬂix, like Facebook, Google,
which make tremendous amounts
of money in this country.
I know there are a lot of people
on the left who at the moment
are furious with the BBC
for elements of its news
and current affairs coverage
during the general election,
and I share a lot
of those criticisms.
But what I would say to those people
on the left who are currently saying
they may as well support defunding
the BBC on political grounds,
is that handing over the British
broadcasting environment
to Rupert Murdoch,
which is what would happen if we no
longer had a licence payerfunded
BBC, is not a credible
left—wing position.
APPLAUSE.
George, what’s going on?
There’s going to be a licence fee
model until at least 2027,
so nothing is being done
in a hurry anyway.
The BBC is a cherished institution,
there is no doubt about that.
But I think both Michael and Howard
have made good points, which is,
just see how media has changed over
the last decade with people now
getting their content
from smartphones, from iPads.
Imagine what’s going to happen
in the next seven years.
So it’s appropriate in my view
to think about what the funding
model should be and how best
you should raise money to fund
the BBC, because it can’t make
sense in the long term
to still have a licence fee based
on sort of conventional
televisions that we grew up
with in the 605 and 705.
At some point the model will need
to change to reflect
the changing way people
are receiving their content.
And do you think public service
broadcasting is possible
under a different model?
Does that even matter, do you think?
I personally think it does, yes.
I think there is an important
role for public service
broadcasting and this
is where the difficulty comes.
How do you fund that
on a subscription only service?
These are complex and difficult
issues and that’s why nothing
is being done in a hurry and indeed,
nothing much will change until 2027,
which is when the licence fee model
continues to at the very least.
So what about the sabre rattling
coming from your government, then,
talking about the licence fee
being under threat?
Why do that if it’s not
in a hurry to change things?
Is itjust to exert a bit
of influence over the appointment
of the next director—general?
I personally haven’t
seen any sabre rattling.
You haven’t seen any
sabre rattling?!
It’s all over the papers,
the front page of the Sunday Times!
You should learn not to believe
everything you see in the papers.
We know your background, the papers.
I don’t believe everything
I read in the papers.
I never have.
Howard has referred to looking
at things over ten or 15 years.
And George hasjust said everything
is going to be the same until 2027.
I don’t think either one of you has
an idea of how quickly this picture
is changing and I’m deeply depressed
by both those answers.
I think the BBC may be in very
serious difficulty if we wait
until 2027 before we decide
on a different model of how the BBC
can be carried forward,
notjust as a means for us to watch
television, but as a means of taking
the wonders of the BBC to the world,
which at the moment are not
available in a modern form,
that is to say they are not
available to the individual
who wants to buy a BBC
programme at the moment
that he or she chooses
to watch it.
APPLAUSE.
We have very little time left,
but you have had your hand up
for quite some time.
You may end up having the last word.
I just think the BBC
is a national institution
that we are all proud of.
And I don’t think anybody
should be worrying about
paying that licence fee.
It’s incredibly good value.
What I think is the problem
is what are we spending that
money on, how much do
we pay our presenters...
And I’m not asking
this to you, Fiona!
If we are paying six and seven
figure salaries to TV presenters,
what does that actually say,
coming back to the lady’s first
question of tonight,
the people that we value in this
country, the people that are doing
really hard jobs, day in,
day out, for a pittance,
and why is that money going to pay
people to do something here,
when I think anybody in the audience
could get up and present a programme
brilliantly as well.
I’m being controversial!
Fighting talk.
To me and Michael.
I’ll do it next week if you like.
0K, watch this space.
On that bombshell, I won’t be
sitting here again...
What’s your name?
Michael.
Michael will be sitting
here next week.
Our hour is up.
Just as well.
Next week we are in Middlesbrough
and the following week
we are in Tunbridge Wells in Kent.
Callus if you’d like
to be in the audience.
Or if you’d like to sit here,
who knows, or present
train programmes!
Or you can go to the Question Time
website and follow
the instructions there.
If you want to have your say
and continue the conversation
on tonight’s topics,
you can as always join Adrian Chiles
and guests on Question Time extra
time on 5 Live right now.
But for now, thank you very much
to the panel, to Michael,
to the audience here
and to you at home for
watching and listening.
From Weymouth.
Bye—bye.
Three men, armed with a pickaxe
and a baseball bat.
It looks like some
sort of hatchback...
I really thought the ceiling was
coming through.
What had this bloke found that he
deserved to die?
Who were those men? No comment.
The plot thickens...
It’s a lot bigger team
than we normally have.
It’s a massivejob, this one.
Take everything, full packs.
It’s Code One.
Police! What’s going on?!
True crime in real time.
This is not our culture.
Some would argue
this is not any of our business.
People don’t like it when they see
blood.
It’s easy to go to the supermarket
and buy beef without seeing
the slaughter.
These pilot whales
should just be left alone.
They don’t need to be slaughtered
forfood orfor tradition.
Whitney!
Patrick!
Every year in the UK, thousands
of baby boys have an operation
where a small part of
their penis is removed
for religious and cultural reasons.
Literally, when the child is born,
eight days later, you circumcise it
and it’s like a sort of
handing on the tradition.
It’s always been done
in the community.
Therefore it’s a tradition
that continues.
Male circumcision is one
of the most common
surgical procedures in the world —
but in Britain it’s also becoming
one of the most controversial.
I think it’s unspeakably not OK
to do that to a baby.
It was done badly.
I’ve had to see plastic surgeons
to try and sort it out.
Its opponents say it is unnecessary
and can cause children to suffer.
The case against mutilating
children’s genitals
is just overwhelming.
But for the parents who do it,
it’s an act of faith.
This is what we did
for our older boy
and we’re completely happy with it.
It’s what we’ve always done.
I’ve been circumcised.
I didn’t have a choice.
Was that wrong?
Should we keep circumcising people?
I’m Adnan Sarwar. I’m a journalist,
I’m from a Muslim background,
and I was circumcised as an infant.
With several European countries
debating a ban on the practice,
I want to find out, is it something
we should consider banning here?
I’m beginning myjourney
at an Islamic circumcision centre
in London.
I’ve never witnessed
a circumcision before,
so I’m here see one
with my own eyes.
I grew up as a Muslim
and I was circumcised,
and this is exactly the kind
of thing
that would have happened to me.
Imagine getting to see what happened
to you when you were born.
This service is based
in the East London Mosque,
where around 80% of their clients
are Muslims —
but anyone can come here
for the operation.
It’s run by a consultant surgeon,
Dr Mohammad Howlader.
He’s a Muslim and he has run
this centre since 2014.
It carries out thousands
of circumcisions every year.
Hello, Adnan. How are you doing?
Mohammad, how are you doing?
Good to meet you.
Good to see you as well.
So why did you start doing it?
I used to see lots of people
who’d come in with complications,
not done in a regulated way,
not by the experienced people.
So I thought if I can provide
a better service for the community
and the people,
better for the children,
that was the incentive for me
to come into the practice.
What is circumcision?
Circumcision is the...is essentially
taking the foreskin
which covers the glans, the head,
to take that off.
We trim it off so that
it looks better looking
and easy to take care of,
look after it after the procedure.
Does the baby feel pain at all?
It’s only from 10—second
injection pain, that’s it.
You can’t get circumcised on the NHS
in England, Wales
and Northern Ireland.
50 parents here have to pay
£120 for the procedure.
How are you feeling as a dad,
and how are you feeling as a mum,
bringing your kid here?
It is the bit stressful, but the
cutting—up bit itself is pain—free.
This is what the doctor said.
It’s our religious custom and this
is what we did for our older boy.
0K.
And we’re completely happy with it.
Naturally, there is concern. Yeah.